Hey, everyone out there who happens to be watching live.
Thanks for being here.
If you got comments or thoughts, put them into the live chat.
If you're watching the replay, well, thanks for coming back to watch it.
And, you know, with that, let's go ahead and kick off the show proper.
Ben, welcome to Talk Python to Me.
Thank you. Thank you so much for having me, Michael.
Yeah, it's really exciting to have you here.
We're going to talk a little bit of legacy code,
a little bit of very, very large code bases
and how you might not have to permanently live in the past,
which I think would be really welcome to a lot of people.
I just talked a little bit about this before I hit record,
but even though your topic is specifically
how the story of move from Python two to three
and this like making your whole code base modern,
I do think that this idea of how do I move
from one code base to another code base
is super relevant to lots of folks who might not be going from Python 2 to 3,
but maybe from Flask to FastAPI or vice versa, or those types of things.
So I think the techniques that you're going to talk about here are more broadly
applicable than just a 2 to 3 migration.
And it's really cool how you all migrated 3.8 million lines of code without
interrupting development. That's kind of nuts.
Yeah, I did it, and it still seems ridiculous.
You lived it, and it seems like a dream.
Amazing.
Before we get to all that, though,
let's start with your story.
How did you get into programming and Python?
Frankly, I took a job at Yelp.
Yelp was a Python shop.
Before that, I had a couple of internships,
and I went to Georgia Tech, and I mostly did Java.
So it was sort of a new experience for me.
Python is one of those beginner languages
that everyone loves to throw around.
So I had done, I dabbled in a little bit,
but I first started really getting deep into the language
when I started at Yelp.
And I've definitely made it,
it's sort of become like,
I've become sort of a local expert on it.
So I've been able to build up a lot of knowledge
about like, you know, a lot of weird edge cases
and, you know, stuff like that, so.
- Yeah, fantastic.
You may be familiar with it.
There's a T-shirt that's kind of a joke, a meme.
It says, "I learned Python.
It was a great weekend."
- Yeah.
- And yet, I've been doing Python for many years
and I'm still learning new stuff.
Even today, I learned some interesting new Python things.
So which is it?
Do you learn it in a day or is it like this deep journey?
What do you think?
- I think most programming languages
have some amount of sort of width and depth.
I think Python definitely has the advantage
of being a relatively straightforward language.
One of the nice things obviously is that
instead of using a lot of weird keywords,
that has words, instead of being like, oh--
Or double pipe.
Yeah, or instead of double pipe and stuff like that.
Those are things that I think definitely help people.
Personally, me coming into it, that
wasn't as big of a deal for me, because I was already
familiar with all that stuff.
You're coming from a very symbol-heavy world of Java,
which is not as symbol-heavy as C++,
but it's got a lot of abstractions in what it builds,
for sure.
- Yeah.
I will say, I think there are certain things
that Python does.
I will say Python is not a perfect language
by any stretch of the imagination,
but I will say one thing about Python
that I think is really cool is it did sort of,
before many other languages, managed to integrate
a lot of functional paradigms,
like list comprehensions or comprehensions in general
are I think one of those features where it's just like,
this doesn't exist in a lot of other sort of more popular languages and they're really,
really fluent and powerful in a way that like,
is it, you kind of miss when you don't have it. Right.
And so like, I think that that's, that's something that's really cool about Python,
but Python itself, you know, being, being a language with the legacy that it has,
you know I mean, we're going to be talking about the two to three differences,
which have their own sort of
nuances to them, but like it's always going to have some weirdnesses to it and some of those things are like just like oh
Someone made a decision, you know 30 years ago that like still kind of reverberates today
um
and that can
And and so that means that like it has this depth to it, you know, you you have to really
Learn the depth in order to fully understand all of the problems that exist. Um
Like dealing with not necessarily problems with the language, but like, you know
When you're building software you run into problems that you have to solve
And so that's like the main, I think that's, it's sort of, that's true of all languages to an extent, especially, you know, popular ones and older ones.
But, yeah, I do think that Python, more than a lot of languages really, is able to straddle the line of like, being like, oh, it's approachable, but also you can do a lot of, you know, really, really interesting and powerful stuff with it.
- Yeah, you compare that with like Java.
Java, you've got to understand functions,
you've got to understand classes, possibly namespaces,
like just to write the first line of code.
Whereas Python, you can work with it for like,
you know what, this is really clumsy to repeat this.
Maybe I'll learn what a function is
and then I can start using that,
but you don't know what a class is,
you don't care about it.
You kind of like slowly layer on the stuff as you need it
the stuff as you need it, rather than you've got to jump in and go with it all at once.
Yeah, for sure.
Yeah. Interesting. So you're still at Yelp?
Yes.
Yeah.
I'm in a conference room in our San Francisco office right now.
Excellent. And what are you doing there?
So I work on a team that's called Core Services.
Our team is responsible for a lot of infrastructure,
mostly Python focused, though not exclusively.
We do a lot of our internal Python infrastructure.
So we'll be responsible for making sure
that we can upgrade to new Python versions.
We own our internal PyPI.
We recently, this is a cool thing that has happened since my talk,
so I didn't mention it, is we recently built a system
to automatically import certain packages from a public PyPI,
and that has saved us some headaches.
And then we own some other stuff,
like we've dealt a lot with the general service contract at Yelp,
So being like, okay, what does it mean to be a service?
How do you be a good citizen there?
And a lot of other things like testing tools,
a lot of like, sort of like,
oh, I need to test against multiple services.
We have a testing tool that like automates
a lot of the steps to like sort of get those
all connected together so you can test against them.
- Yeah, it sounds like a really fun
set of tasks you're doing there.
So you said you have an internal,
We're going to dive into code and stuff
and all this whole migration.
But just kind of sidebar, you said
you have this internal private PyPI server.
What's the details around that?
Obviously, you're whitelisting things
that can be brought inside, saying
we're going to put those onto our server.
And you can request, and you can choose
when to let the new one in and so on.
But what's the software, and how do you put that together?
Right. So a number of years ago now, we switched to a piece of software that I don't think
is used pretty much anywhere else, which was built by one of my teammates, who named Chris
Keel. So Chris Keel built a essentially a PyPI implementation called dumb PyPI. It's
It's called dumb PyPI because unlike some other PyPI servers,
the way that it works is you just sort of give it
a list of distributions, and then it just generates
all of the HTML pages.
So instead of being like, oh, I'm a server,
and I'm going to handle this request and blah, blah, blah,
and run some code, it's literally like, OK,
here are the HTML pages.
- I see.
It's like a static site generator for a PyPI backend.
Yeah, yeah.
And we've been using that for a really long time,
and maybe like four or five years now.
And it's served us pretty well.
And it's really nice, in my opinion,
because it's the only service that my team actually owns,
and it never pages us.
So that's great.
I love that it never pages us.
It can't go down.
Yeah.
Not really.
- Well, it can't, it would be good if it goes down,
but also it doesn't.
That's the great part, is it just doesn't.
So Chris's software works great.
- Yeah, that's a really cool idea.
And so you tell it certain versions
or do you just limit it to the libraries
and let it pick the latest versions
of whatever's on real PyPI?
- So the way that we do it is we have a whole system
which imports packages.
We actually rebuild all of our wheels.
It's kind of for kind of hard to explain reasons,
but so what we'll do is we'll like,
someone will say, hey, I want this version of this package.
Or maybe they'll just say, hey, I want this package
and then we'll just pull down the newest one at the time.
And we'll do some like security vetting on it.
So we have some like automated security stuff
and basically just make sure that it's like not malicious.
And then we build the wheels and then we upload those
to the S3 bucket that like backs our PyPI.
So we just do that.
In terms of like how we decide,
it's basically just sort of like,
we make sure, we do the security check,
we do like, there's a few other things,
like we make sure we have all the dependencies,
We make sure we have, that it has like a license
that we're okay with, you know, with using internally.
And so all of those things are checked.
And then we have, as I mentioned,
we have this sort of like automated import system.
So like certain packages, we'll just,
we'll try to download them.
They might fail, you know, one of those checks
and then we won't upload it.
But like, you know, so we'll just like import it.
We'll try to import it.
And so certain packages, we'll try to get the newest one.
Some packages, we haven't set that up for one reason
or another.
Some packages-- there are certain packages
that are just difficult to build,
and so we avoid importing them.
Right.
We got this one working.
It's fine.
Yes.
And so some are difficult to build.
Some are just like, oh, this is a package
we've never used before.
So we just don't use it.
Yeah.
So we don't have it.
>> Yeah, you talked about how many dependencies your projects
have and stuff.
And that'll be fun.
But let's maybe take a step back and just talk about Python
at Yelp, this main project that you have.
It was running on Python 2.
I mean, it's kind of obvious.
But some of the reasons are obvious, some are not.
Like, why did you care what version of Python it's on?
That's a good question.
I mean, I think the main reason was just sort of like we saw the writing on the wall.
The writing on the wall was the end of life for Python 2, right?
And I think everyone else, we knew that other people were going to follow that, right?
There was, I remember in 2019 when I was looking into this, there was a thing, I think it was
called like the Python pledge or something like that, where basically like packages would,
open source packages would say like, "Hey, we're going to drop Python 3, you know, after
end of life at some point, like, you know, either the day of or, you know, a few months
later or something like that." And so we were sort of looking at that and being like, "Well,
we use some of those packages, you know, and eventually we might want to upgrade them."
- You're about to get frozen in time around mid 2020. So you're, you maybe don't want
that.
And by the time that I did my talk, I remember,
I think it was early 2021 or something,
Pip had dropped support for Python 2.
So that was like one of those things
where it was just sort of like,
yeah, there's not a realistic ecosystem
in which you are able to use like open source
and like upgrade your stuff for security patches or whatever.
I want this new feature.
Oh, sorry, that's Python 3 only kind of thing.
So that was like the main motivation.
- Right.
- And then I think some secondary stuff
was just sort of like, you know,
as you build, as you, you know, as time marches on
and like people stop being familiar with like Python 2
and it has some quirks, you know, compared to Python 3,
you definitely have the problem of like,
okay, now you have to like, if you're hiring people
and they're working on Python 2,
you have to train them up on those quirks
in a way that like you wouldn't necessarily have to do
if you're using a modern language that other places are using.
And so those were, I think, the main motivations.
Personally, I think I had a small motivation myself,
which was just sort of like, I hate seeing things be left
behind like this.
Yeah, sure.
Very emotional thing.
But yeah, that's part of the reason I pushed for it.
Well, there's the train thing.
There's obviously just the infrastructure stopping,
stopping the updates.
But there's the training side of helping people
who are new come, but there's also the,
how do you hire the very best engineers?
It's really hard to get an amazing Python engineer
to come and say, you're gonna do amazing work from 2008.
You're gonna love it, you know what I mean, right?
Like, if they're working on some new package
that they're inspired about, instead of trying
to bring that in and help make that better
and also boost what you're doing,
it's like, well, we can't use that
'cause you only do it in Python 3.
Well, of course, I created it two years ago.
Why wouldn't it be Python 3 only?
There's a lot of knock-on effects like that, right?
- Yeah.
- Did you see the performance stuff from 2.11
or even from 2, sorry, 2.11, 3.11 or even 3.10,
where you're like, you know,
there might actually be fewer servers as well if we do this?
That's definitely something that we want to do.
That specific issue is something that we're
trying to move towards being able to use
those versions of Python right now.
It's always a process just because
of various internal things.
But it's definitely something that
has been talked about is we're like, yeah,
if we could use new versions of Python,
maybe things will be faster, things will be more efficient.
Trying not to spend too much money
is definitely a thing that we think about.
So that's definitely exciting.
Yeah.
When I did the episode on 3.11, we
talked a lot about the performance there.
And it's impressive.
It's 40%, 50%, 60%.
And I won't steal your thunder.
I know at the end, you've got some nice performance boosts
that you got even from the changes that you made.
But there was somebody in the audience that pointed out,
not only is this faster, which is nice for us--
it's nice that we have to pay less for servers,
or it's nice that our code runs a little bit faster,
but it's also good for the planet.
If we just all start using newer, faster foundations,
then necessarily we just use less energy
to do the same thing that we're already doing.
- Yeah, that's definitely, I like that for sure.
- I do too.
I do too.
All right, well, let's talk about Python at Yelp.
So you've got this repo, this big project called Yelp main.
Let's start there.
- Sure.
Yelp main is what it sounds like.
It is sort of the original repo Yelp.
That's, you know, when you're a startup in 2004,
you kind of just make a repo, right?
And it's your web app.
- And that's probably made a Subversion repo.
- It wasn't.
- None of that CVS stuff we're gonna do in Subversion.
- I don't remember when we switched from Subversion,
but it was Subversion.
I don't know if it was before,
I don't know if we actually started out in Subversion,
but 'cause I didn't start until 2014.
But yeah, it's definitely Subversion was,
I know there was some old Subversion stuff,
But so you have this one, you know, sort of web app
and the web app is a server that serves,
that originally served everything.
So, you know, there's a bunch of stuff,
like, you know, you can sort of think of as like,
you know, you have yelp.com, right?
Like if you go to www.yelp.com,
then you're looking at what you think of as Yelp, right?
It's like, oh, I can search for businesses,
I can look at their reviews, I can write my own reviews,
that kind of stuff.
So it's that, but it's also other stuff.
It's also our business owner site.
So biz.yalt.com, which is, you know,
where business owners like look at their own businesses
and like are able to see like metrics and like, you know,
buy ads and stuff like that.
There's our admin site, which is, you know,
where a lot of, you know, anybody,
we have our sort of user operations people whose job is
at least partially to do some moderation
and stuff like that.
So like we need to be able to have those tools.
And then there's also what we call internal API.
And internal API is a way for internal stuff
to get the data that's in Yelp main.
So that's what that is.
And that's like its own separate sort of site.
But these are all in the same repo.
They all run in the same process.
That's, yeah, sorry, say something.
- No, I was just gonna ask,
is this kind of the mono repo style
or it's truly a monolith in the sense
that it's kind of all the same app?
- It's truly a monolith.
I mean, there is some amount of stuff where it's like,
oh, we have like different containers
running like different entry points,
but like the code is all kind of tangled up together.
So there's not really a meaningful delineation
between different components
in a way that you could really separate them out
in any meaningful way.
So like my understanding of like what I would define
as a monorepo, I wouldn't really call it that.
I would just call it, I would call it a monolist.
- Just a large app.
- Yeah, it's just a huge, huge, huge app, huge repo.
- Yeah, yeah, okay.
So in your talk, you said that you have six different sites
with 2000 different endpoints.
- Yeah.
- Which it's a lot.
I don't think it's completely excessive or anything,
like 2000 URL endpoints for all those different services
and like all those different admin apps.
It seems it's a lot, but it's not insane.
And then you have these background batch services.
What's the story of those?
- It's just sort of anything that you need done.
You know, as I said, this was just sort of like,
this is the one repo, right?
And so there's a lot of things that you want done
that aren't necessarily done in the context of a web request
or don't make sense to do synchronously.
So a lot of that is just sort of like,
okay, I need to do this really complex report
or something, right?
I wanna get some metrics that involve
collating a bunch of data,
doing a bunch of joins against a bunch of tables.
Okay, well, I'm not gonna have just a web request do that,
I'm gonna put that in a separate process.
And we originally, as you can imagine,
for that type of application,
we just called them those batches.
Yeah, a batch job, right?
That name is stuck, despite the fact that now batches
don't necessarily do that type of work.
They're just sort of anything
that you wanna do in the background.
- Right.
- And that could be something like,
oh, the first of the month we do our like ad billing,
or, you know, we might have some process
where it's just sort of like, oh, we want to update this cache
based on data stuff, but we don't
want to do it inline in a web request.
We can do it asynchronously.
So it's really anything that is not
in the context of a web request.
I suspect most major apps, most companies
have that kind of stuff too, right?
They've got to.
I mean, everyone has some version of it.
whether or not they do it exactly the way that we do it
is a separate question that I'm not really sure.
- Yeah, I think part of the story is,
do you deploy them all out of the same code base?
Or are they a bunch of different jobs and repos
or how's that fit together?
That's probably where it varies.
- Yeah, I mean, for us, we have,
I mean, I said 800 batches
and I was referring specifically to the batches
that are still in the Yelp main repo.
And like I said, all of these things
are kind of tangled together.
So it's not like, oh, you can just like pull a batch out.
Like that's like talking about like,
well, how do you get the data that it needs?
And like, what does that look like?
And blah, blah, blah.
- So how does it get the data access layer?
And how does it get a hold of the logging thing
that's over here and all that kind of stuff, right?
- Exactly.
So like, so there's 800 batches,
but we also have tons and tons of batches
that are in services.
So they live in service repos and they run,
and they're in a totally separate code base.
I don't know what that number is.
I'd have to figure it out, but it's definitely a lot.
It's probably, it's almost certainly more
than we have in Yelp main at this point,
but that paradigm exists all over Yelp
and not just in this repo.
- Yeah.
Well, I think these are a lot of value
to having that code together, right?
If you break this out into a whole bunch
of different repos, you've got dependency management,
versioning, deployment, like there are some values
just saying like, just let it live together.
We'll upgrade it together, but it does make
for some striking headlines when you talk about
how many lines of code got upgraded at once, right?
- Yeah, I mean, I think that when you're talking about
like, why do we still have a monolith?
The answer is mostly just because it's really hard
to not have one, once you have one,
you have to do all the work to move it out.
And there are disadvantages, like you said,
it's sort of like, okay, now, as soon as you have
new repo, it has its own set of dependencies that you have to keep up to date and you have
to do other sort of maintenance on it.
Generally speaking, we consider that better though still because it's sort of like, it's
always better.
Imagine if I'm in this giant monolith and I'm like, "Oh, I need to upgrade this package."
And it's like, "Okay, well, you want to do a major upgrade and this package is imported
in a thousand places.
Now you need to deal with that migration.
Whereas if it's like, oh, I'm in my service and I need to do this package upgrade and
it's imported in 10 places, that's like an afternoon instead of like, you know, a quarter
of a year or something, right?
So there's definitely advantages to that.
It does add, it's sort of like more work overall, but you can do it in a more granular way.
So it allows you to unblock people faster, essentially.
So we definitely want to move away from monolith
and we have been doing that.
Compared to when I started at Yelp,
we have way, way less of a code
that is important running in Yelp main.
There is still a ton that's important in there.
Like I mentioned in my talk,
almost inevitably someone has to call into an internal API
to get data out of it.
So that's something that we definitely want to fix
at some point, but it is a process
and that process is generally speaking,
like we're getting to a point where like some people
who work at Yelp don't really work in Yelp main anymore.
Like they just don't have to deal with it,
especially not on a day-to-day basis.
- Right, sure.
And you mentioned your talk,
I don't know if I said this at the beginning,
but you gave a talk at PyCon 2022,
which is definitely was a very popular one
and highlights some of these things there as well.
So I'll be sure to link to that
that people can check it out.
And you talk about people developing in Yelp main,
some of them not, but there's still a lot happening there.
You said 20 pushes a day, 800 simultaneous developers.
And yeah, that's no joke.
That's a lot of traffic on a repo.
- Yeah, I think since I did that talk
where we've been trending down
in terms of number of changes per day,
but it's still probably like somewhere in the eight,
like 15 to 25 a day.
So it's less, like that's an appreciable percentage less,
but it's still a lot of changes per day.
Yeah.
- Yeah.
And you also said you have 700 Python package dependencies.
We talked about the private PyPI.
So when you say you have 700 dependencies,
that's if I go into the virtual environment
and type, you know, pip list, I see 700 things.
- Yep. - Okay.
It's a lot. - It's a lot.
It was an ordeal dealing with that.
- Especially coming from a long time ago until present,
right, in terms of code, code compatibility, right?
Some of those things you depended on,
maybe their new versions have moved to Python 3,
but maybe with breaking changes.
Others, they might just not have a Python 3 version.
And how did you deal with that?
There were basically, in terms of like open source stuff, there were basically like three
ways that we dealt with that.
So one is just like upgrade, right?
And like deal with whatever the upgrade entails.
I don't think we really ran into any issues where we were like, oh, no, we have to do
this like massive, you know, breaking change, you know, migration.
That wasn't really a problem that we ran into, thankfully.
So a lot of those were just sort of like figuring out what packages need to be upgraded and
just sort of doing the upgrade, making sure that they test pass and that kind of stuff.
So that wasn't too bad.
The other one, which was a little bit more annoying, was, like you said, some packages
just stopped updating before they got Python 3 support.
And we were relying on them.
So we had to be like, OK, well, can we
replace these with something that fixed that?
And there were a few examples of packages
where it sort of stopped getting development,
and then someone was like, oh, I see where the problem--
that's a problem for me, so I'm going to fix that.
And so luckily, a lot of people had already done that work,
and there were forks or sort of drop-in replacements,
or sometimes not exactly drop-in replacements,
but close enough that we could do the small amount of work
that was needed.
>>It's one of the advantages of being a little bit later
to the party is it lets other people bump into those problems
and maybe they fixed them for you, right?
That probably happened most of the time, honestly.
>>That was definitely a good chunk of the time.
I couldn't tell you, I'd have to go back and run the numbers
on what percentage of the time that was, but we definitely,
yeah, there was definitely a good chunk of things
where we were just sort of like,
Oh, someone already made the fork or whatever,
and we can just use that.
And that was nice.
It was sort of like, okay, that one checked off.
And then the final sort of grouping
was stuff where that wasn't available.
So it was like, oh, this package is Python 2 only,
and no one ever made a replacement.
So we need to deal with that.
Luckily, none of those were in a position
where we were completely, you know, unable to deal with it.
Like we didn't run into anything where we were like,
oh, this is just like, this is like a blocker.
But there were things where we were like,
oh, this thing needs to be replaced with something else
that does something similar, or maybe refactor right away.
Like very often we run into code where it was like,
oh, this is using this thing.
and then you'd start looking into it
and you're like, oh, actually this code is like,
this like branch or whatever that uses this package
isn't actually used anymore.
So we can just delete all that code
and like not have to think about it.
So that's how we dealt with it.
- Yeah, that's a nice way to upgrade it.
It's just get rid of it.
- Yes.
- Were there any packages that you're out there
that didn't have Python 3 support?
And you're like, really?
We really depend on this one
that you upgraded and contributed back?
Or were you able to just move on?
- There was nothing that we ran into
that was like an absolute blocker like that.
So we didn't end up contributing anything
in terms of open source,
other than there were some packages
that are like on our GitHub,
like the Yelp GitHub that we did do upgrades for.
>> Sure.
>> So that was the only sort of open source work
that we, I think, really ended up doing.
Yeah, so luckily-- I mean, I don't know if this is lucky
or not, but it's definitely--
it happened so that we didn't have to do that.
>> Yeah, that's good.
I mean, it would be nice if you ran across that
and helped solve it for someone, but you
don't have to, even better.
Testing-- one of the challenges of--
First, it's good to have tests.
But one of the challenges of these upgrades
is you wanted to do this without disrupting development.
You wanted to keep adding new features.
You didn't want to say, hey, everyone,
stop making any progress or bug fixes for six months.
And we're all just going to do this until we're done.
You wanted to keep it moving.
But in order to do so, you've got
to run the test because you're making wholesale changes
to millions of lines of code.
So that's pretty nerve wracking, right?
And you're swapping out its dependencies in big ways.
And yet running tests, you all have a lot of tests
and they take a while to run, right?
- Yeah, we have about a hundred thousand tests
in Yelp main, little under.
And yeah, if you were to run them serially,
at least when I wrote my talk, it was about 35 hours total.
but we have a test runner framework called Jolt
that we wrote internally.
And what it does is it basically like
puts those tests up into bundles
and then runs those on across a bunch of machines.
And so you're basically able to get
all of the tests run for Yelp main in about
give or take an hour and a half.
- Okay.
That's pretty good for running a hundred thousand tests.
That's still a long time to have a test run though, right?
So you probably need it.
You can't just get immediate feedback,
minor change, how'd that go, minor change, how'd that go?
You kind of,
gotta be a little more thoughtful than that, right?
- Yeah, I mean, I think that in terms of,
and this sort of gets into like testing theory, right?
Is that like, you start to get an idea of like,
what changes are like, affect what other things,
like sometimes you're not gonna have a perfect idea,
But if you're like, oh, this is a thing
that just affects everything,
then you're gonna run all the tests.
But we did have the ability to run tests
if we were like, okay, we wanna just run tests
under Python 3, we could do like,
oh, I'm just gonna run this test module under Python 3.
I can do that.
And so if you were literally just like,
oh, I'm checking, I'm fixing this test under Python 3,
then you could just do that.
You could just be like, oh, I'm iterating very quickly
by changing the code and then running the test
under Python 3 and then, oh, it passes.
Okay, let me double check it passes under Python 2 as well.
And then you can commit that and then put that into PR.
And then we do require, so one of the things is
we do require doing a full Jolt run
for every pull request to Yelp main.
So in order to do, so you have to run that anyway,
but while you're waiting for that to run,
you can work on something else.
- Sure.
- And you're really high confidence.
- You'd run a couple, okay, that makes sense.
So run a couple of local tests,
10, 100, 500, whatever.
Once you're happy with that,
then you put it as a PR and CI figures out what happens.
- Yeah.
- Okay.
- And I think that ultimately,
when we were really early on,
we were working on the really foundational stuff,
'cause that was causing the most issues.
That was the time when we were like,
oh, we really gotta run all the tests.
But once you get down to the nitty gritty, pretty early on,
actually, you really don't need to think about how
it affects other things.
It's mostly just sort of like, yeah, this module
affects its own tests, and that's pretty much it.
OK.
Yeah, I'm sure you get a feel for it over time.
These are the kinds of far-reaching changes,
and these are the kinds of things I can stay really
focused on.
Yeah.
The other requirement you said that you had was that any
changes must be rollback safe.
Can you speak to that?
I'm thinking like database migrations or that, right?
What are you thinking here?
- Yeah, I mean, it's sort of,
I think database migrations are a good example
of that type of thing.
We didn't really run into a situation
where we actually had to do any schema changes to databases,
although there was a thing where we had to do,
We had to make some changes to some data
such that it would be parsed properly
under both Python 2 and 3.
But yeah, what you always want to do
is you want to say, OK, if I undo this later, maybe
like a week later, someone realizes,
oh, this change made a problem, has a problem.
We don't want to be in this business where we say, oh, we
can't undo that.
Something else.
depends on it and we can't undo it.
And so that was like a main thing.
It was just sort of like, don't do these things
where you're just sort of like,
oh, once we do this, we can't go back.
It's like, no, don't do that.
If you need to like do some extra work
where you like build up scaffolding or whatever,
then like do that work instead.
And it might take a little bit longer in the long run,
but it makes us have less risk.
Yeah, I'll save diving into this for later in our conversation.
But one of the things that you were able to do because of that
is you were able to run the app simultaneously in 2 and 3
and use a URL reverse proxy like Nginx or something to say,
this part of the web app runs Python 3.
And this one over here is running Python 2.
And filter the traffic and switch it
based on how it's performing or behaving.
If it goes wrong, you can switch it back quick.
if you didn't have that compatibility,
it would be like, all right, today we pulled a switch,
chunk, and then like, you deal with the consequences
for how long Yelp is down, right?
So that's an interesting consequence of this idea
that it should be able to be rollbackable
as you can actually run both versions
and then sort of migrate more cautiously.
- Yeah.
- You had a cool picture,
And let me put it on the screen for us here.
Where you talked about the four different steps,
the phases and timelines
and how much time you spent in there.
You wanna talk us through this?
- Yeah, sure.
So this is just sort of like,
if you wanna think about,
okay, you've got some Python two code
and you want it to get it to Python three.
it's very easy to think about it in a sort of atomic way
is you just sort of like,
"Oh, make it Python 3 compatible."
And it's like, okay, makes sense on small stuff.
You know, if you're like, "Oh, I got my 500 line script
and I'm gonna migrate to Python 3 today."
You know, but on big stuff,
when you're talking about millions of lines of code,
you wanna think about it in terms of,
in sort of level of compatibility.
And so the three levels that we had to deal with here
were parsability, which basically just means
Like if you try and run this module with Python 3,
will it fail with a syntax error or not?
And so that's the main thing.
And parsability, it turns out, is pretty easy to fix,
because there were not a huge number of syntax changes.
And they're pretty easy to detect and fix
in an automated way.
Yeah, did you use some tooling like PyUpgrade or any
those types of things.
- PyUpgrade we used a little bit.
It's not super designed for this,
but there was a one specific thing
that was really nice about it,
which is that it could convert,
it could detect octal literals.
So if you put like zero and then a number
that's an octal literal in Python two,
that's not allowed in Python three,
so you have to do zero, O, number.
And it was able to detect those really easily and like fix them, which was really nice.
Those things, it sounds like, oh, well, that's not that much work or that much help.
But when you're doing it across millions of lines of code, anything you can automate, it's got to be really welcome, right?
There was a relatively common pattern. The reason that I remember that one is there was a relatively common pattern where like people would create like date time objects.
And then they would write year, month, day.
And if the month or year was single digit,
they would prefix it with a zero, which works in Python too.
They probably didn't mean to make it octal,
but that's what they did.
- Yeah.
- And so it kind of worked.
And so people, and so that existed in a lot of places
and it was like a popular pattern, but yeah.
So PyUpgrade was useful in that way.
It was useful later on when we were like,
like blowing away all the sick stuff
'cause it's able to fix all those things automatically,
which is nice, or most of them.
But Python Modernize was where a lot of,
most of our automation went
because it could fix a lot of this stuff.
Yeah, so that was parsability.
Importability is similar, is that you try to import it
And then you say, okay, this is failing with an import error
or something is making it fail to import,
like usually running some code at the top level.
And that was a little bit longer.
A lot of that was fixing standard lib imports,
You make most of those use 6Gems.
If they change, there's a 6Gem for that.
And then some of it was also upgrading the packages
so they could be used under Python 3 and imported.
And then there was a little bit of top level stuff
where it was like, oh, this top level thing
is calling dict.iteritems or something,
and you got to fix that.
- Yeah, so that probably gets maybe a little into
the functional parity, which if people look at your talk,
they'll see there's a couple weeks of the parsability,
maybe a month or two of the importability,
then a whole bunch of the functional parity.
And it reminds me of when I was learning C++ way, way,
way back, and I got really excited
'cause I finally got some complicated code to compile,
not really knowing like, oh no, no, no, no, no.
You're only at the beginning
of figuring out what's wrong with this.
The compile is the part where it shows you what's wrong.
Now it's like the mystery tour.
And like, this is after that, right?
This is like kind of once you get past parsing
and importing, then you're into the,
how are they different behaviorally?
- Yes. - Yeah?
- Yeah. - Okay.
- Yeah, and this is, it's just sort of like,
I alluded to this earlier,
but basically the idea of you run all of your tests.
And luckily we had already built up a lot of infrastructure
that was really useful to us.
So one of the things that Jolt was able to do
is it was able to do some normalization of tracebacks
and then be like, oh, these tracebacks are similar enough
that I'm gonna group them together as a single error
and say like, oh, this many tests are failing
with this sort of traceback.
And so that was really useful because it was we were able to just sort of be like, okay
Here's where the error is and it's gonna fish fix this many tests
Or at least unblock this many tests. Yeah, and
So
That was about a year of basically going through all of those test failures and
figuring out okay, why do they file fail under Python 3 and
just fixing them.
So a lot of it was like,
oh, this thing's supposed to be a string,
but it's bytes or vice versa, or, you know.
- The calling dot items, but it's,
that used to be a list and it's not a list anymore.
Yeah, so you can't index it.
- Yeah, so there's all sorts of,
there's all sorts of nitty gritty things
that you just have to go through and fix them.
Some of them are automatable, but like,
you really need to,
but not everything is and some of them are more subtle.
Yeah.
- What was your target Python 3 version?
- We ended up, so we originally targeted 3.6.
At the time it was like the newest version
when we started the project,
it was like the newest version that we had available
that we were like, we're sort of ready for, if you will.
During the project, it was obviously a long project,
we were able to get 3.7 available.
And it was actually really great because we were like,
I don't know, less than a month out from when we were like,
oh, we're gonna start doing the rollout.
And my coworker, Chris, who wrote dump API,
was working on this project at the time.
And he was like, you know what?
I bet we could migrate this to Python 3.7.
And I'm like, go for it.
Let's see how hard it is.
And he did it in like a day.
So it was just like, it was just like,
Oh, he just upgraded it.
I think there were maybe a few--
3.7 does have that one backwards incompatibility
where it makes async a keyword.
So there were a few packages where you needed to upgrade.
But he was able to do it really quickly.
And we were just like, OK, and now we're
going to roll out to 3.7.
So that was nice that it was sort of like we
were working on 3.6 for most of it.
We switched to 3.7 near the end, and it just sort of worked.
And it sets the foundation for going to the next version
after that, right?
- Yeah, and which is, it's actually really weird.
Chris is working on that again.
He's gonna be trying to upgrade us to 3.8,
like this week, basically.
- Okay, cool.
That's really excellent.
What was the emotional state of you and the team
as you were going through that year of fixing?
Nope, it's list of dic.items, not list.items
or dictionary.items.
And like probably excited in the beginning,
but you know, six months, then what was that like?
Or making progress or like,
oh God, it's still here, we're not done.
- I mean, I saw, I knew what it was gonna be like
going into it.
Like I was like, I mean, not exactly,
but like I was like,
I know that it's gonna be this thing where it's like,
we're gonna make some progress
and then we're gonna, it's gonna taper off
because of the way that these things work.
But it was definitely like,
it was sort of like you were just sort of
doing your tasks every day
and each task in and of itself was not valuable, right?
It was sort of like,
"Oh, well, I fixed three tests today,"
you know, kind of thing.
But ultimately,
I was able to see like where the end was.
So for me, I was like,
I was like, yeah, we're going to do this.
We're going to do it.
I think not everyone on my team was necessarily
like as sort of eye on the prize as I was, which is fine.
I think we ended up swapping out,
basically everyone on the team ended up working on it
at one point or another, but it was only me
and another one of my colleagues
who worked on it basically the whole time.
So I think, you know, part of it was that some people
we're like, okay, I'll work on that a little bit,
but I don't want to only work on that.
And that's totally understandable.
Like, I think that this type of work is kind of tedious.
And this is sort of like,
this is another argument against monoliths
is sort of saying like, if you have to do this
when you need to do these type of migrations,
it becomes really punishing on software engineers.
- Yeah.
- So.
- Like if you haven't done linting ever,
five years into it, you like,
oh, let's get see what's wrong with you.
We're at the lunch, you're like 100,000.
And it's like, you know what, we're not doing that.
We're just gonna ignore those, let's just stay.
'Cause you can't just stop and go do 100,000 fixes.
There's more value on the other side of this.
So it makes a lot of sense.
It must have felt pretty good to get it all done though.
- Yeah, it really did.
I mean, it's sort of weird how these projects work
is that you're sort of like, you're doing the work,
you're doing the work and then like one day
you're just sort of like, and we're done.
And it's been a year and a half of my life, you know,
but it's exciting.
It was like, I had multiple people tell me,
they said to me, hey, it's so cool that you,
that, you know, we were able to do that
because I never thought it would happen.
And so like, it's kind of amazing to do something
that some people are like, this won't ever happen.
But it happened, and we made it happen.
And I think that was really great.
Let's talk a little bit about how
you were able to run this on Python 2 and 3.
So what did you do?
You basically create two virtual environments, one
from each setup, or each version,
and then run tests there, try it out there.
Yep, that's basically it.
I mean, there is a technique to having like code
that runs under Python two and three,
which is that, you know, you basically have to make sure
that you're using compatibility layers.
And we use six for that.
That was something that me and most of the people on my team
had some pretty significant experience doing
because that's basically how we wrote all of our like
libraries or internal libraries.
and actually a lot of our open source ones as well,
because you know, you want for a long time there,
you were like, okay, I want to have Python 2
and 3 compatibility.
So having code that works under both was like pretty normal.
So we, so making sure that that code
is sort of can run under Python 2 and 3,
and then building the virtualenv,
there was a little bit of nuance,
or like there was a snag there,
which is that like something that comes up
every once in a while when you're doing this kind of stuff.
And this is still a thing that happens to this day
is you have to deal with backport packages.
So there's like the futures backport,
which was the concurrent,
which like concurrent futures was added in,
might've been 3.0,
I don't remember exactly what version of Python it was added
And there was like a few other back ports.
Functools32 was back port for adding some of the stuff
in Python 3.2's functools, like lru-cache,
which is something we used a lot of.
So those were both packages where we wanted to,
we needed to actually install them in Python 2
because like there are packages somewhere in our,
in the dep tree that needs them.
So what we ended up doing is we made this like
silly little script that it just sort of like
took our requirements file and then filtered out the things
that don't install under Python 3
and just spit out a new one.
And that's the one we built our Python 3 virtual imp with.
And so then we have Python 2 and Python 3 virtual imp
and they're like really similar,
not exactly the same, but close enough.
and then we can run the test against either one of them.
- Nice.
- And then eventually we would do the rollout like that.
- It does sound like one of the challenges
had to do with caching and you have a way
in which you were using pickle
to stuff some results into memcached.
Is it memcached D or memcached like past tense?
I never know how to pronounce that one right.
I looked at their website like a year ago,
or like, I guess two years ago or something
when I was actually working on this.
And I'm sure that I know, I'm sure that I read it
'cause it said it there, I remember,
but I don't remember what the answer is.
- Yeah, no worries.
So let's go with memcached, I'll call it memcached.
So you were stuck, previously you were pickling things.
You were CPickling, but then that just became pickling.
But at some point, it's one thing to say
at the database query level will T serialize
and serialize an ORM object to match the schema?
It's a whole nother to say the binary shape of this thing
is the same across Python versions,
which is highly unlikely, right?
Which is pickle.
- It's basically impossible.
That was like the, yeah,
that was one of the big problems that we had.
So we were basically taking up,
we were basically like, so we would pickle,
there's like a cache key
and then there's a cache value, right?
We would pickle both and then the cache key,
we would like hash so that it could be like,
you know, a specific binary sequence.
And then that would, and then we'd key into that
in order to get stuff out of the cache.
But it turns out that for a multitude of reasons,
both the key, like you said,
the key is not gonna be binary the same.
So like, that's one of the problems.
And the other problem is that there's a lot of like weirdnesses when you end up like either reading Python two pickles in Python three or reading Python three pickles in Python two.
So,
it seems like pickles are kind of meant to be transient.
They're not meant to be long term storage because there's not a lot of guarantees around their possibility.
Yeah, yeah.
And so we were like, OK, well, what's
the thing that we can do where we don't have to start being
like, OK, now we have to write complicated serialization
and stuff?
And we were like, well, probably JSON.
JSON will work, right?
And so this is something I worked on for about three
months or something, was just migrating all of our caches
to use JSON instead of Pickles.
Yeah, you had this kind of fallback mechanism
or this slow upgrade mechanism that said,
try to get the JSON version from Memcache.
And if you got it, awesome, go with that.
But then fall back and try to get the binary pickle,
but then immediately replace it with the JSON version
so that it just grows over time.
I mean, thinking about that much code and that many services,
there must just be a ton of startup cost
if you just kick all the servers over and clean the cache?
- Yeah, I don't know.
We've never tried it.
I think everyone's a little bit too scared,
but it's definitely not something we wanted to do.
And we wanted to be able to be like,
okay, when we cut over to Python 3,
we're not just gonna lose all of our caches, right?
Yeah, I think this is actually a really great example
of something we were discussing
before the recording started
of doing a sort of incremental upgrade.
And one of the other things I didn't super
get into in my talk is that one of the things that I thought
was a really cool technique--
and this really depends on whether or not
this is worth it.
It depends on how you end up--
what the value of your uptime is, basically,
compared to your dev time.
But what I did is I sort of logged,
what I would do is I would like,
for every cache, I would be like,
okay, I'm gonna try to log this to JSON.
And then if it failed, I wouldn't just fail,
I'd like do the normal stuff.
I'd do all the pickle stuff, whatever.
But then I'd log it somewhere.
And so that way I could just like look at this log
and be like, oh, here's where my errors are.
So it wasn't just like, oh, I would like ship changes
and then see if there were actual errors on production.
And it's like, there's no errors on production.
There's just errors in this log that I can fix and iterate on.
And no user ever sees a 500.
Not everything's going to fit into that,
but I think that's a really useful technique.
Yeah, that is really cool.
Because no matter how much testing
you do on something this big, it's
not until you really put it out there
you see that 100% sure it's gonna hang together.
But if it can fail silently in a way that people don't see,
but you get notified about this,
you can start working on it.
That's really valuable.
Another thing that you did that I thought was pretty clever
was the way that you did the rollouts,
where you were able to say,
even though this is one huge monolith of code,
it doesn't mean it breaks evenly, right?
once you get it past the parsability stage,
there could be some URL endpoint that's gonna fail
if you request it, and another that works totally fine.
All right, so what you all did is you created
a reverse proxy, and I was imagining Nginx.
What were you actually using there?
- So it's kind of Nginx.
It's OpenResty, which is a framework
where you can write plugins for Nginx in Lua.
So you can do some sort of general logic in that.
- So you're basically able to say,
you go to yelp.com/something or api.yelp.com
or whatever it is, as far as a user, it's the same.
But some of those URLs are hitting the Python 3 version
of this large monolith app running
and some are hitting the Python 2.
and you could move it URL, URL endpoint at a time, right?
- Yeah.
- Talk to us about that, that's pretty clever.
- Yeah, this was a super cool technique.
So we already had the reverse proxy layer,
we had the routing service.
This was something that we had built for
just sort of consolidating a bunch of logic
in a general place where everything could rely on it.
But it was a really great place for us
to be able to put this logic as well.
And I'm going to say him again.
Chris Keel, my colleague on my team,
came up with this idea as well.
So it's such a great idea.
And it applies, I think, really generally.
you can just say, "Okay, anytime I'm doing some sort of rollout
where the setup is in such a way that I can't do it per--
I can't do it within my application,
there's something about the application setup,
if you have this external layer, then you can pretty easily do it."
And yeah, it was basically just sort of like--
we would have a configuration and it would say,
like, okay, this like prefix endpoint
or like this endpoint prefix would go to Python two
or this one would go to Python three.
And we can actually even be a little bit more granular
that we could actually give it a percentage of the time.
So basically like, you know, 20% of the time
it goes to Python two, 80% of the time goes to Python three,
you know, and so we could do these sort of slower rollouts
if people wanted to be more careful.
- I see.
So maybe it goes like, it's on Python two,
Now 1% of the traffic goes to Python 3.
Is it dying or no?
It seems okay, it seems okay.
All right, now 20, now 80.
Like you could like slowly move it over.
So if it fails, at least it fails just for a few people
and you don't even roll it back.
You just stop sending traffic there and fix it,
which is really good.
- Yeah.
- Yeah, very clever.
And it certainly makes sense for large projects.
But what's great is it lets you start getting
your Python 3 version in production way earlier, right?
You're not waiting on the last endpoint,
you just need the first endpoint.
I mean, probably you didn't do this the very,
like, one URL works, put it out there,
but like, you could do it much sooner
than you would otherwise, right?
- Yeah, for various sort of practical reasons,
we didn't want to actually start the rollout
until we were like, oh, all of the tests
pass under Python 3, because we didn't want people
to be like, oh, I'm running my tests,
and they're not passing and that's bad.
And I mean, they're gonna like ignore them
or try to fix them in a bad way and stuff like that.
But like, I mean, it was like a two month process
where we were like from the first endpoint
to the last endpoint, it was like two months.
And so that was able, that was really nice
because it was like, oh, we would detect issues
and then we would, but we would keep rolling out other stuff
and then, you know, the teams
or we could try and fix the issues.
And so, yeah.
- Yeah, very neat.
That's great.
All right, let's wrap this up.
We're getting short on time here.
You had some clear benefits,
even though you went to Python 3.6,
which I think you'll see those benefits again
if you go to 3.11, all right?
But even so, going from, where'd you go from 2.7 to 3.6?
- We went from 2.7 to 3.7.
- 2.7 to 3.7, right on.
Okay, cool.
And you said it got faster and used less memory.
That's pretty good.
- Yeah, I don't remember the exact numbers.
It was in my talk, but.
- I stole them from your talk,
15 to 20% speed up and 20% less memory.
That's a tangible.
- That's right, that's right, yeah.
I remember, so we have,
this is something I didn't mention in my talk,
but I thought, I think it's kind of interesting.
So we have some stuff that is,
you know, more CPU heavy,
which we send to what we call VIP instances.
So VIP, like containers have more memory and more CPU,
okay, allocated towards them.
And so I remember I talked to someone
who was involved in doing a lot of that operational stuff.
And after that migration, they looked at numbers
and they were like, "Oh, we can now scale down the VIP
to what the old normal one was."
And the normal one is now scaled down even more.
- That's cool.
- Yeah, which was super cool.
So it was super good to do that.
And I think that beyond just,
"Oh, this gave us this immediate,
or this gave us this outcome,
it's like we weren't going for this outcome,
but I think it really shows how this type of work,
like if you're like,
I think very often it's easy to look at
base level infrastructure work as like,
oh, well, it's just maintenance
and you just need to do it and blah, blah, blah.
And it's not really benefiting anything.
And it's like, no, we did this
and it saved money on our bottom line.
And not necessarily everything is gonna be like that,
But I think that thinking about base level infrastructure
is like, it does have a benefit.
It might not necessarily be obvious before you do it,
but this is an example of, okay,
if you're doing your upgrades,
you get to take advantage of all the really hard work
that all of the people on the Python language team have done
to make it more efficient and faster.
- Yep, and it probably opens up other possibilities.
The previous show I just did, which is not out yet,
so you wouldn't know, but was talking about Ruff,
the linter written in Rust for Python.
But you have this ability to integrate
with more modern tools and modern language.
It's like, oh, if we gotta rewrite this section
in Rust for that computation, it's trivial now,
where probably it wasn't before, I would imagine.
I haven't tried integrating Python 2.7
with things like that, but I bet it's not as easy
as the new tools, you know?
>> Yeah, for sure.
>> All right, well, let's leave it here.
I think that's all the time we got to talk about it.
But you must be enjoying it,
enjoying work on the projects and the features more now.
You can just kind of the world is your oyster again.
>> Yeah. Yeah, I love using --
the project that I've been working on actually lately
is we've been adding a lot of type annotations
internally.
That's a Python 3 feature right there.
- Yeah, absolutely.
You can use f-strings, you can use type annotations,
you can start using tools like mypy,
not just standard type annotations, just for editors,
but yeah, Pydantic, for example, all those things, right?
Very cool.
All right, now before you get out of here,
I got two questions.
I always ask at the end of the show.
If you're gonna write some Python code,
what editor are you using these days?
I'm a Vim person.
All my development of Vim.
- Right on.
And then notable PyPI package,
give a shout out to Python Modernize,
but anything that stands out
you wanna give a shout out to like that?
- Well, I mentioned Python Modernize,
great, excellent tool for what it is.
I also gave a shout out in my,
I gave a shout out to a couple other things in my talk,
but I think they're definitely worth giving a shout out to still,
which is PyUpgrade, which we mentioned earlier.
It has a lot of really nice features,
but one of the sort of other things is kind of the other half of Python modernize
is that it can take your sort of six shim filled code
and turn it into sort of normal Python 3 code.
And then another tool by the same former colleague of mine,
and this is Tilly is pre-commit.
Other modernizes a pre-commit hook,
Py upgrade is a pre-commit hook.
That's a thing that we use extensively internally.
Super, super nice to be able to like,
do all those sorts of things and do it in an incremental way
which is something that was really valuable.
And then the last one, this is just completely random one
but I just love it is more it or tools.
One of my favorite packages,
we have like an internal package
that has a lot of the like functions
that are in more than our tools,
but they're worse or like quirky in some way
that I don't like.
And so that's something that was like,
when I first found out about it,
I was like, oh man, this is great.
And I think it's pretty popular now,
but like, I think it's one of those things
where it's just sort of like, oh,
there's all these little functions that you're like,
oh, I could write that.
And it's like, you could, but you'd probably
write it with bad edge cases or something.
So it's a great library.
- And it's better if you don't have to write it,
that's for sure. - Yes, yes.
- All right, well, Ben, thanks for being on the show.
Final call to action, maybe some other people
are out there facing this transformation they gotta do.
Like I said, not actually Python 2 to 3,
but some major foundation in their code base.
What do you tell them?
- Figure out a way to make it incremental.
That's really, I think the main takeaway for me
is that incremental changes have multiple benefits.
They make you less risky.
You're able to do these types of changes in a way,
like where you don't necessarily have to be like,
oh, we have to schedule two years of work.
It's like, no, you can do it a chunk at a time
when you have time and also it just like generally
makes your, you know, you have less errors.
- Yeah, absolutely.
All right, well, thanks so much for being here.
It's been great to have you on the show.
Appreciate it.
- Thanks so much for having me.
- Yeah, you bet.
Talk to you later.
[BLANK_AUDIO]